Exam Date & Time: 19-Dec-2025 (01:15 PM - 04:30 PM)
CHAROTAR UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
B.Tech IT 5th Semester
December - 2025
DATA ANALYTICS AND VISUALIZATION [IT389]
Marks: 70 Duration: 195 mins.
Section 1

1 A dataset has columns: employee_id (e.g. "E102"), joining_date (2023-04-15), hours_worked (e.g. 160.5), and (1)
department_level (e.g. "Junior", "Mid", "Senior"). Which of the following correctly identifies the data types for
these columns?
employee_id: Nominal,
employee_id: Ordinal, employee_id: Continuous, employee_id: Nominal,
joining_date: Date,
joining_date: Continuous, joining_date: Nominal, joining_date: Discrete,
hours_worked:
hours_worked: Discrete, hours_worked: Continuous, hours_worked: Discrete,
Continuous,
department_level: Nominal department_level: Ordinal department_level: Nominal
department_level: Ordinal
2 In a survey dataset, the column satisfaction_level uses values ["Unsatisfied", "Neutral", "Satisfied", "Very (1)
Satisfied"]. This is an example of which type of data?
Nominal Ordinal Continuous Discrete
3 A dataset contains missing values in a column household_income. The analyst observes that the distribution of (1)
income is heavily right-skewed (many low incomes, few high incomes). Which imputation method is most
appropriate?
Replace missing values with Replace missing values with Drop all rows with Replace missing values with
the mean income the median income missing values the mode of income
4 A company finds a correlation coefficient of +0.85 between marketing_spend and monthly_revenue over past (1)
24 months. What does this indicate?
Higher marketing spend is Higher marketing spend is No relationship Revenue causes
strongly associated with higher strongly associated with lower between spend and higher marketing
revenue revenue revenue spend
5 A dataset of employee records has missing values in the salary column due to incomplete submissions. The (1)
analyst decides to impute missing values to maintain data integrity. Which imputation method is most
appropriate if the salary column is normally distributed?
Scatter Line
Bar chart Histogram
plot plot
6 A startup founder wants to examine relationship between number of ads run and number of new customers (1)
over time. Which plot best helps identify whether there is a trend or correlation?
Line Box Scatter
Pie chart
plot plot plot
7 A large dataset with thousands of points shows many overlapping points when plotted in a scatter plot. Which (1)
technique or issue does this describe?
Overplotting / over-lapping Missing axis Uniform
Incorrect color scale
points labels scaling
8 To compare salary distributions across three departments (HR, Tech, Sales), showing medians and outliers, (1)
which visualization is best?
Line Box Scatter
Histogram
plot plot plot
9 After mean-imputation of missing ages in a dataset, an analyst notices that the variance in age is reduced, and (1)
relationships with other features are weakened. What disadvantage does this illustrate?
Hard to Distortion of variable relationships & reduced Not applicable to numerical Computational
implement variance data complexity

10 A data scientist considers encoding a categorical city feature for model input. The feature values have no (1)
inherent order (e.g., "Delhi", "Mumbai", "Chennai"). Which encoding technique is most appropriate?
Label Encoding Ordinal Encoding One-Hot Encoding Binning
11 A data scientist wants to visualize the spread and concentration of product prices using Seaborn. Which of the (1)
following functions is best suited for displaying the distribution of a single continuous variable?
seaborn.countplot() seaborn.histplot() seaborn.scatterplot() seaborn.boxplot()
12 What is the primary purpose of exploring a dataset in the initial stages of data analysis? (1)
To create machine To clean the To understand the data's structure, patterns, and To perform
learning models data key characteristics statistical tests
13 While building a bar chart of average monthly sales using Seaborn, a data visualization engineer wants to align (1)
the visual theme with brand identity. Which parameter should they modify to apply a custom color scheme?
hue_style bar_theme palette cmap_style
14 A dataset containing employee salaries has a normally distributed column with occasional null values. Which of (1)
the following imputation strategies is best suited to preserve the central tendency?
Median Mean Zero
Mode substitution
imputation imputation fill
15 While preparing a dataset of property prices that includes extreme outliers, an analyst notes a right-skewed (1)
distribution in the price column. Which imputation method is most appropriate to handle missing values in such
skewed data?
Mode Forward Median
Mean substitution
fill fill imputation
16 A dataset contains a categorical feature named "Product_Type" with categories like "Appliance", "Furniture", (1)
"Clothing", and "Electronics". The categories are unordered and intended for model input. Which encoding
strategy should be applied?
Ordinal Encoding Frequency Encoding One-Hot Encoding Binary Encoding
17 A Power BI analyst is building a custom formula to calculate margin percentage using the expression: (1)
(Profit/Sales) * 100. Which component of Power BI should be used to define this custom field?
Model View: Add Report View: Format Power Query Editor: Custom Dashboard: Slicer
Column Panel Column Control
18 Which of the following statements is true about using a Symbol Map in Tableau? (1)
A Symbol Map is used to show A Symbol Map uses points or Symbol Maps are ideal for Symbol Maps are
aggregated data values by shapes to represent individual showing patterns of used for displaying
geographic region using color data points on a geographic density or intensity across time series data on a
shading map a region map
19 A data analyst at an Indian bank is working with a pandas DataFrame named transactions_df that stores customer (1)
transaction data. The analyst wants to create a new column called 'total_amount' by multiplying the values of existing
columns 'quantity' and 'price_per_unit'. Which of the following commands correctly performs this operation?
transactions_df['total_amount'] transactions_df['total_amount'] transactions_df['total_amount']
transactions_df['total_amount']
= transactions_df['quantity'] + = transactions_df['quantity'] * = transactions_df[['quantity',
= transactions_df.apply(sum)
transactions_df['price_per_unit']transactions_df['price_per_unit'] 'price_per_unit']].sum(axis=1)
20 A data analyst needs to extract specific rows and columns by their numeric index from a pandas DataFrame. (1)
For example, selecting rows 0 through 4 and columns 0 through 2. Which pandas method supports this
operation?
df.select() df.loc[] df.iloc[] df.range()
Section 2

21 You are working with a dataset containing financial records from various Indian banks. Before performing (5)
exploratory data analysis, the data must be cleaned and transformed to ensure accurate downstream modeling.
Using pandas, describe and demonstrate the use of the following preprocessing techniques with relevant
examples:
Handling Duplicate Records
Converting Data Types

Binning Continuous Variables
Applying Lambda Functions for Column Transformation
22 An e-commerce company has customer purchase data distributed across multiple CSV files by quarter. Before (5)
analysis, the data needs to be consolidated and structured. Using pandas, explain and illustrate with examples
how the following operations support dataset preparation:
Reading multiple files into a single DataFrame
Appending rows with different schemas
Inner Joins
Outer Joins
Conditional Filtering using .loc[] and Boolean masks
23 Given the following basic scatter plot code, modify it to incorporate five enhancements: (5)
Set the figure size to 8x5
Use red circle markers
Add gridlines to the chart
Include a chart title: "Scatter Plot: Temperature vs Ice Cream Sales"
Label axes as "Temperature (°C)" and "Sales (in Rs.)"
24 Analyze and evaluate how sheets, dashboards, and stories in Tableau serve distinct yet interconnected (5)
purposes in the process of visual data communication. Discuss their individual functions, interrelationships, and
role in guiding decision-making. Support your explanation with an example of retail sales data.
[OR] (5)
25
Arrange the following Tableau filters in the correct order of execution, and briefly describe the role of each. How
does understanding this order help in improving dashboard performance and filtering behavior?
Data Source Filter
Extract Filter
Context Filter
Dimension Filter
Measure Filter
26 Evaluate how the roles of Data Analyst, Data Engineer, Data Scientist, and Business Analyst differ in the data (5)
analytics lifecycle. Write a comparison of their primary responsibilities in the following areas, highlighting
overlaps, distinctions, and their strategic importance.
Data collection and pipeline design
Data cleaning and transformation
Statistical modeling and machine learning
Business insight generation and reporting
Section 3

27 A data analyst is investigating whether there is a relationship between hours of social media advertising and (5)
the number of new customer sign-ups across five recent digital marketing campaigns. The data collected is as
follows:
Hours of Advertising (X) = [5, 8, 12, 15, 20]
New Customer Sign-ups (Y) = [100, 140, 200, 230, 300]
Using the Pearson correlation coefficient formula, calculate step-by-step the strength and direction of the linear
relationship between advertising hours and customer acquisition. Conclude whether the correlation is strong,
weak, positive, or negative.
28 Review the following business scenarios and write the names of the most suitable chart type for each. Justify (5)
your selection based on the nature of data and visual communication objectives:
Displaying monthly profits for two business units over a year.
Comparing the total footfall across various store locations.
Understanding the spread of product delivery times in minutes.
Showing the percentage contribution of expenses across marketing channels.

Visualizing the correlation between product price and units sold.
29 The following code generates a basic line chart using Seaborn. Apply the following five visual customizations to (5)
improve interpretability:
Set line color to orange
Add the title: "Sales Growth Over Time"
Use dotted line style
Resize the figure to 12x5
Add axis labels: "Month" for x-axis and "Sales (₹)" for y-axis
30 Analyze the relationship between sales and profit by applying the following task. The dataset with two (5)
quantitative variables, sales, and profit, which include additional fields regions, and product categories. Write
steps to accomplish this using Powerbi:
Create a scatter plot in Powerbi for visualizing Sales vs. profit.
Filter the chart to show data for a specific region (e.g., "East").
Provide a summary of the analysis, explaining any key insights about how Sales and Profit
[OR] (5)
31
Write steps to perform the following task in Power BI using a Dataset that includes a categorical variable,
Product Category, and a continuous variable, Sales.
Create a bar chart that shows the total Sales for each Product Category
Use data labels to display the exact sales values on each bar
Add a filter for Region to analyze how the sales distribution across Product Categories changes when
filtering for a specific region
32 In Tableau, different types of charts serve specific purposes in data visualization. How would you decide which (5)
chart type to use in the following scenarios? Explain with justification:
Comparing sales performance across multiple regions
Showing the trend of product sales over time
Displaying the distribution of customer ages
Highlighting the relationship between profit and sales
Visualizing the composition of total revenue by product category
[OR] (5)
33
What are the measures and dimensions in the tableau? Compare and contrast the following terms in the
tableau along with an example:
Continuous measures
Categorical measures
Continuous dimensions
Categorical dimensions